Chapter 8 (#41)
malcolmbarrett/causal-inference-in-R: chapters/chapter-08.Rmd

The target population is the *full sample* or population of interest.
The **estimand** here is the expected value of the difference in potential outcomes across all individuals:

$$E[Y(1) - Y(0)]$$

An example research question is "Should a policy be applied to all eligible patients?"[@greifer2021choosing]

Most randomized controlled trials are designed with the ATE as the target estimand.
In a non-randomized setting, the ATE can be estimated using full matching, where each observation in the exposed group is matched to at least one observation in the control group (and vice versa) without replacement.
Alternatively, the following inverse probability weight will allow for the ATE to be estimated using propensity score weighting.

$$w_{ATE} = \frac{X}{p} + \frac{(1 - X)}{1 - p}$$

In other words, the weight is one over the propensity score for those in the exposure group and one over one minus the propensity score for the control group.
Intuitively, this weight equates to the inverse probability of being in the exposure group that you were observed to be in.

Let's dig a bit deeper into this causal estimand using the Touring Plans data.

> Recall in Chapter 4 we examined the relationship between whether there were "Extra Magic Hours" in the morning and the average wait time for the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train the same day between 5pm and 6pm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall in Chapter \ref(TODO) we examined the relationship between whether there were "Extra Magic Hours" in the morning and the average wait time for the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train the same day between 5pm and 6pm.
```

Let's fill this in with a cross-reference after we're done reformatting to quarto

From this table, there were 291 days that did not have extra magic hours in the morning and 56 that did.
We also see 30% of the extra magic mornings were during peak season compared to 21% of the non-extra magic mornings that were during peak season.
Additionally, days that had extra magic mornings were more likely to close at 6pm (18:00:00) compared to non-magic hour mornings.
The median temperature on days with extra magic hour mornings is a bit lower (79 degrees) compared to non-extra magic hour morning days.

Now let's construct our propensity score weight to estimate the ATE.
The {propensity} package has helper functions to allow you to estimate weights.
The `wt_ate` function will calculate ATE weights.

```{r}
library(propensity)
seven_dwarfs_wts <- seven_dwarfs_with_ps |>
  mutate(w_ate = wt_ate(.fitted, extra_magic_morning))
```

Let's look at a distribution of these weights

```{r}
ggplot(seven_dwarfs_wts, aes(x = w_ate)) +
  geom_histogram(bins = 50)
```

Here we see that many weights are close to 1 (the smallest possible value for an ATE weight) with a long tail leading to the largest weight (around 24).
This distribution highlights a potential problem with ATE weights.

> They range from 1 to infinity; in small samples, if your weights are too large this can lead to bias in your estimates (known as finite sample bias).

Reviewer: Maybe this is where we should put a thorough definition of this type of bias

> The {gtsummary} package allows the creation of *weighted* tables.

Reviewer: let's break paragraphs here since these ideas are a little different

> To do this, we need to load the {survey} package and create a survey design object.

Reviewer: I don't think we mention survey by this point

Recall that the {survey} package is currently the best way to incorporate weights in various R functions.
This has a historical explanation, as the techniques needed to incorporate weights historically were used for survey analyses.
Even though we are not doing a survey analysis, the same techniques are useful for our propensity score weights.

```{r, message=FALSE}
library(survey)
seven_dwarfs_svy <- svydesign(
  ids = ~ 1,
  data = seven_dwarfs_wts,

>   weights = ~w_ate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  weights = ~ w_ate
```
Just to be consistent between the arguments

)
tbl_svysummary(seven_dwarfs_svy, 
            by = extra_magic_morning, 
            include = c(wdw_ticket_season, close, weather_wdwhigh)) |>
  add_overall() # add an overall column to the table
```

Notice in this weighted table, the variables are more **balanced** between the groups.

> For example, looking at the variable `wdw_ticket_season`, in the unweighted table we see that a higher percent of the days with extra magic hours in the mornings were during the peak season (30%) compared to the percent of days without extra magic hours in the morning (21%).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, looking at the variable `wdw_ticket_season`, in the unweighted table we see that a higher percent of the days with extra magic hours in the mornings were during the peak season (30%) compared to the percent of days without extra magic hours in the morning (21%). TODO: Switch to cross reference for tables
```

In the weighted table this is balanced, with a weighted percent of 21% peak days in the extra magic morning group and 22% in the no extra magic morning group.
The weights here are changing the distribution of the variables by weighting each of the observations so that the two groups appear balanced.
Also notice that the distribution of variables in the weighted table now matches the Overall column of the unweighted table.

> That is what ATE weights do -- they make the distribution of variables included in the propensity score for each exposure group look like the overall distribution across the whole sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is what ATE weights do: they make the distribution of variables included in the propensity score for each exposure group look like the overall distribution across the whole sample.
```

Now let's take a look at the weighted table.

```{r}
seven_dwarfs_svy <- svydesign(
  ids = ~ 1,
  data = seven_dwarfs_wts,
  weights = ~w_ato
)
tbl_svysummary(seven_dwarfs_svy, 
            by = extra_magic_morning, 
            include = c(wdw_ticket_season, close, weather_wdwhigh)) |>
  add_overall() # add an overall column to the table
```

Like the ATM weights, the ATO pseudopopulation may not resemble the overall, exposed, or unexposed unweighted populations, so it is important to examine these weighted tables to gain a deeper understanding about the population on whom we will be drawing inference.

We can again create a mirrored histogram to observe the ATO weighted psuedopopulation.

```{r}
ggplot(seven_dwarfs_wts, aes(.fitted, group = extra_magic_morning)) +
 geom_mirror_histogram(
   bins = 50
 ) + 
  geom_mirror_histogram(
    aes(fill = factor(extra_magic_morning), weight = w_ato),
    bins = 50,
    alpha = 0.5
  ) + 
  scale_y_continuous(labels = abs) +
  labs(x = "propensity score",
       fill = "Extra Magic Morning")
```

This looks similar to the ATM pseudopopulation, with slight attenuation, as evidenced by the increased down weighting in the exposed population.

> In general, the authors prefer using the ATO weights when the overlap (or evenly matchable) population is the target, as they have improved variance properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We generally prefer using the ATO weights when the overlap (or evenly matchable) population is the target, as they have improved variance properties.
```
